IB Mathematics Functions

Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide

Concepts
Essential understandings
Models are depictions of real-life events using expressions, equations or graphs while a function is defined
as a relation or expression involving one or more variables. Creating different representations of functions
to model the relationships between variables, visually and symbolically as graphs, equations and tables
represents different ways to communicate mathematical ideas.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Representation, relationships, space, quantity, equivalence.
AHL: Systems, patterns.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Different representations of functions, symbolically and visually as graphs, equations and tables
provide different ways to communicate mathematical relationships.
• The parameters in a function or equation correspond to geometrical features of a graph and can
represent physical quantities in spatial dimensions.
• Moving between different forms to represent functions allows for deeper understanding and provides
different approaches to problem solving.
• Our spatial frame of reference affects the visible part of a function and by changing this “window” can
show more or less of the function to best suit our needs.
• Equivalent representations of quadratic functions can reveal different characteristics of the same
relationship.
• Functions represent mappings that assign to each value of the independent variable (input) one and
only one dependent variable (output).
AHL
• Extending results from a specific case to a general form can allow us to apply them to a larger system.
• Patterns can be identified in behaviors which can give us insight into appropriate strategies to model
or solve them.
• The intersection of a system of equations may be represented graphically and algebraically and
represents the solution that satisfies the equations.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 21
36 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Syllabus content
The aim of the SL content in the functions topic is to introduce students to the important unifying theme of
a function in mathematics and to apply functional methods to a variety of mathematical situations.
Throughout this topic students should be given the opportunity to use technology, such as graphing
packages and graphing calculators to develop and apply their knowledge of functions, rather than using
elaborate analytic techniques.
On examination papers:
• questions may be set requiring the graphing of functions that do not explicitly appear on the syllabus
• the domain will be the largest possible domain for which a function is defined unless otherwise stated;
this will usually be the real numbers
Sections SL2.1 to SL2.4 are content common to both Mathematics: analysis and approaches and
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 2.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Different forms of the equation of a straight line.
Gradient; intercepts.
Lines with gradients m1 and m2
Parallel lines m1 = m2.
Perpendicular lines m1 × m2 = − 1.
y = mx + c (gradient-intercept form).
ax + by + d = 0 (general form).
y− y1 = m(x− x1) (point-gradient form).
Calculate gradients of inclines such as mountain
roads, bridges, etc.
Connections
Other contexts: Gradients of mountain roads, gradients of access ramps.
Links to other subjects: Exchange rates and price and income elasticity, demand and supply curves
(economics); graphical analysis in experimental work (sciences group subjects).
TOK: Descartes showed that geometric problems could be solved algebraically and vice versa. What does
this tell us about mathematical representation and mathematical knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 2.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of a function, domain, range and graph.
Function notation, for example f (x), v(t), C(n).
The concept of a function as a mathematical model.
Example: f (x) = 2 − x, the domain is x ≤ 2,
range is f (x) ≥ 0.
A graph is helpful in visualizing the range.
Informal concept that an inverse function reverses
or undoes the effect of a function.
Inverse function as a reflection in the line y = x, and
the notation f −1(x).
Example: Solving f (x) = 10 is equivalent to finding
f −1(10).
Students should be aware that inverse functions
exist for one to one functions; the domain of f −1(x)is
equal to the range of f (x).
Connections
Other contexts: Temperature and currency conversions.
Links to other subjects: Currency conversions and cost functions (economics and business management);
projectile motion (physics).
Aim 8: What is the relationship between real-world problems and mathematical models?


Syllabus content
International-mindedness: The development of functions by Rene Descartes (France), Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibnitz (Germany) and Leonhard Euler (Switzerland); the notation for functions was developed by a
number of different mathematicians in the 17th and 18th centuries–how did the notation we use today
become internationally accepted?
TOK: Do you think mathematics or logic should be classified as a language?
Download connections template
SL 2.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The graph of a function; its equation y = f (x). Students should be aware of the difference between
the command terms “draw” and “sketch”.
Creating a sketch from information given or a
context, including transferring a graph from screen
to paper.
Using technology to graph functions including their
sums and differences.
All axes and key features should be labelled.
This may include functions not specifically
mentioned in topic 2.
Connections
Links to other subjects: Sketching and interpreting graphs (sciences group subjects, geography,
economics).
TOK: Does studying the graph of a function contain the same level of mathematical rigour as studying the
function algebraically? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having different forms and symbolic
language in mathematics?
Download connections template
SL 2.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Determine key features of graphs. Maximum and minimum values; intercepts;
symmetry; vertex; zeros of functions or roots of
equations; vertical and horizontal asymptotes using
graphing technology.
Finding the point of intersection of two curves or
lines using technology.
Connections
Links to other subjects: Identification and interpretation of key features of graphs (sciences group
subjects, geography, economics); production possibilities curve model, market equilibrium (economics).
International-mindedness: Bourbaki group analytical approach versus the Mandlebrot visual approach.
Use of technology: Graphing technology with sliders to determine the effects of altering parameters and
variables.
Download connections template
38 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Syllabus content
SL 2.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Composite functions. ( f∘ g)(x) = f (g(x))
Identity function. Finding the inverse function
f −1(x).
( f∘ f −1)(x) = ( f −1
∘ f )(x) = x
The existence of an inverse for one-to-one functions.
Link to: concept of inverse function as a reflection in
the line y = x (SL 2.2).
Connections
TOK: Do you think mathematics or logic should be classified as a language?
Download connections template
SL 2.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The quadratic function f (x) = ax2 + bx + c: its
graph, y -intercept (0, c). Axis of symmetry.
The form f (x) = a(x− p)(x− q), x-
intercepts (p, 0) and (q, 0).
The form f (x) = a (x− h)2 + k, vertex (h, k).
A quadratic graph is also called a parabola.
Link to: transformations (SL 2.11).
Candidates are expected to be able to change from
one form to another.
Connections
Links to other subjects: Kinematics, projectile motion and simple harmonic motion (physics).
TOK: Are there fundamental differences between mathematics and other areas of knowledge? If so, are
these differences more than just methodological differences?
Download connections template
SL 2.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solution of quadratic equations and inequalities.
The quadratic formula.
Using factorization, completing the square (vertex
form), and the quadratic formula.
Solutions may be referred to as roots or zeros.
The discriminant Δ= b2 − 4ac and the nature of the
roots, that is, two distinct real roots, two equal real
roots, no real roots.
Example: For the equation 3kx2 + 2x + k = 0, find
the possible values of k, which will give two distinct
real roots, two equal real roots or no real roots.
Connections
Links to other subjects: Projectile motion and energy changes in simple harmonic motion (physics);
equilibrium equations (chemistry).
(a + b)2 − a2− b2
International-mindedness: The Babylonian method of multiplication: ab=
2 . Sulba Sutras
in ancient India and the Bakhshali Manuscript contained an algebraic formula for solving quadratic
equations.
Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide39
Syllabus content
TOK: What are the key concepts that provide the building blocks for mathematical knowledge?
Use of technology: Dynamic graphing software with a slider.
Enrichment: Deriving the quadratic formula by completing the square.
Download connections template
SL 2.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The reciprocal function f (x) = 1
x
and self-inverse nature.
, x ≠ 0: its graph
Rational functions of the form f (x) = ax + b
cx + d and
their graphs.
Equations of vertical and horizontal asymptotes.
Sketches should include all horizontal and vertical
asymptotes and any intercepts with the axes.
Link to: transformations (SL2.11).
d
Vertical asymptote: x = −
;
c
a
Horizontal asymptote: y =
c.
Connections
International-mindedness: The development of functions, Rene Descartes (France), Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz (Germany) and Leonhard Euler (Switzerland).
TOK: What are the implications of accepting that mathematical knowledge changes over time?
Download connections template
SL 2.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Exponential functions and their graphs:
f (x) = ax
, a > 0, f (x) = ex
Logarithmic functions and their graphs:
f (x) = logax, x > 0, f (x) = lnx, x > 0.
Link to: financial applications of geometric
sequences and series (SL 1.4).
Relationships between these functions:
ax = exlna; logaax
= x, a, x > 0, a ≠ 1
Exponential and logarithmic functions as inverses of
each other.
Connections
Links to other subjects: Radioactive decay, charging and discharging capacitors (physics); first order
reactions and activation energy (chemistry); growth curves (biology).
Aim 8: The phrase “exponential growth” is used popularly to describe a number of phenomena. Is ths a
misleading use of a mathematical term?
TOK: What role do “models” play in mathematics? Do they play a different role in mathematics compared to
their role in other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
40 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Syllabus content
SL 2.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solving equations, both graphically and analytically. Example: e2x − 5ex + 4 = 0 .
Link to: function graphing skills (SL 2.3).
Use of technology to solve a variety of equations,
including those where there is no appropriate
analytic approach.
Examples:
ex = sinx
x4 + 5x − 6 = 0.
Applications of graphing skills and solving
equations that relate to real-life situations.
Link to: exponential growth (SL 2.9)
Connections
Other contexts: Radioactive decay and population growth and decay, compound interest, projectile
motion, braking distances.
Links to other subjects: Radioactive decay (physics); modelling (sciences group subjects); production
possibilities curve model (economics).
TOK: What assumptions do mathematicians make when they apply mathematics to real-life situations?
Download connections template
SL 2.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Transformations of graphs.
Translations: y = f (x) + b; y = f (x− a).
Reflections (in both axes): y = − f (x); y = f ( − x).
Vertical stretch with scale factor p: y = p f (x).
Horizontal stretch with scale factor 1
: y = f (qx).
q
Students should be aware of the relevance of the
order in which transformations are performed.
Dynamic graphing packages could be used to
investigate these transformations.
Composite transformations. Example: Using y = x2 to sketch y = 3x2 + 2
Link to: composite functions (SL2.5).
Not required at SL: transformations of the form
f (ax + b).
Connections
Links to other subjects: Shift in supply and demand curves (Economics); induced emf and simple
harmonic motion (physics).
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 11
The aim of the AHL functions topic is to extend and build upon the aims, concepts and skills from the SL
content. It introduces students to useful techniques for finding and using roots of polynomials, graphing
and interpreting rational functions, additional ways to classify functions, solving inequations and solving
equations involving modulus notation.
Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
41
Syllabus content
HL students may be required to use technology to solve equations where there is no appropriate analytic
approach.
AHL 2.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Polynomial functions, their graphs and equations;
zeros, roots and factors.
The factor and remainder theorems.
Sum and product of the roots of polynomial
equations. n
For the polynomial equation: ∑
r = 0
arxr = 0,
the sum is −an − 1
an
the product is ( − 1)na0
an
Link to: complex roots of quadratic and polynomial
equations (AHL 1.14).
Connections
Links to other subjects: Modelling (sciences group subjects)
TOK: Is it an oversimplification to say that some areas of knowledge give us facts whereas other areas of
knowledge give us interpretations?
Enrichment: Viete’s theorem in full, “The equation that couldn’t be solved” quadratic formula reducing a
quadratic to a linear, Cardano and Bombelli.
Download connections template
AHL 2.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Rational functions of the form
f (x) = ax + b
, and f (x) = ax2 + bx + c
cx2 + dx + e
dx + e
The reciprocal function is a particular case.
Graphs should include all asymptotes (horizontal,
vertical and oblique) and any intercepts with axes.
Dynamic graphing packages could be used to
investigate these functions.
Link to: rational functions (SL 2.8).
Connections
International mindedness: Bourbaki group analytical approach versus Mandlebrot visual approach.
TOK: Does studying the graph of a function contain the same level of mathematical rigour as studying the
function algebraically? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having different forms and symbolic
language in mathematics?
Download connections template
42 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Syllabus content
AHL 2.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Odd and even functions. Even: f ( − x) = f (x)
Odd: f ( − x) = − f (x)
Includes periodic functions.
Finding the inverse function, f −1(x),
including domain restriction.
Self-inverse functions.
Connections
International-mindedness: The notation for functions was developed by a number of different
mathematicians in the 17th and 18th centuries. How did the notation we use today become internationally
accepted?
TOK: If systems of notation and measurement are culturally and historically situated, does this mean
mathematics cannot be seen as independent of culture?
Download connections template
AHL 2.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solutions of g(x) ≥ f (x), both graphically and
analytically.
Graphical or algebraic methods for simple
polynomials up to degree 3. Use of technology for
these and other functions.
Connections
TOK: Are there differences in terms of value that different cultures ascribe to mathematics, or to the relative
value that they ascribe to different areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 2.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The graphs of the functions, y = | f (x)|
Dynamic graphing packages could be used to
investigate these transformations.
and
y = f (|x|), y =
1
f (x) , y = f (ax + b), y = [ f (x)]2
.
Solution of modulus equations and inequalities. Example: |3xarccos(x)| > 1
Connections
International-mindedness: The Bourbaki group analytic approach versus Mandlebrot visual approach.
Download connections template
Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
43
Syllabus content